Sts preferences update (#498)
knocklabs/docs: content/preferences/overview.mdx

---
title: Preferences
description: Learn how notification preferences work in Knock.

> tags: ["recipients", "conditions", "prefs", "preferences"]

Author: yes great call!

section: Preferences
---

[Preferences](/reference#preferences) enable your users to opt-out of the notifications you send using Knock.

## How preferences work

> A user has a `PreferenceSet`. A `PreferenceSet` is a JSON object that tells Knock which channels, categories, and/or workflows a user has opted out of receiving.

Author: Yep this is a great suggestion, and agree we should generally link to the definition of a code object the first time we mention it in a doc. Could you add that as a rule to docs style guide?

> A user has a `PreferenceSet`. A `PreferenceSet` is a JSON object that tells Knock which channels, categories, and/or workflows a user has opted out of receiving.

Reviewer: Yep!

{
  "channel_types": { "email": false }
}
```
<br/>
```json title="Unsubscribe user from at-mention notifications"
{
  "workflows": { "mention": false }
}
```

You can combine these keys to create [preference grids](https://knock-in-app-notifications-react.vercel.app/preferences):

```json title="A preference grid for categories and channels"
{
  "categories": {
    "collaboration": {
      "channel_types": {
        "email": true,
        "in_app_feed": true
      }
    },
    "project-updates": {
      "channel_types": {
        "email": false,
        "in_app_feed": true
      }
    },
    "billing-updates": {
      "channel_types": {
        "email": true
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The `PreferenceSet` above models this preferences grid in your application:

<Image
  src="/images/what-is-knock/preferences.png"
  alt="An image of a preference set"
  width={1356}
  height={1452}
  className="rounded-md mx-auto border border-gray-200"
/>

## Quick start

In our [preferences quick start guide](/preferences/quick-start), we walk you through how to have a standard category-channel preferences center working locally in your application in under an hour.

> ## Build your preference center

Author: Good notes here. My thoughts. 

I wanted to reframe as "build your pref center" as I think today it's not super intuitive what "environment-level defaults" do and why they are important. They are actually *really* important as if you have any kind of pref center you're rendering to your users, you'll need a default set — unless you're just opting users into everything. While env-level defaults is not super easy to understand, "building your pref center" is so I think helpful to start from that frame of reference. 

If we take developers through creating a pref center in main part of docs, is it as important to understand what default env pref schema looks like? Not totally sure on that to be honest. I think if we guide users to place in dash where these are set, we should just show the default value there as a placeholder. We don't do this today but I ticketed it here: https://linear.app/knock/issue/KNO-5953/show-default-environment-pref-set-value

On last point, I mentioned this in another comment below, but I think for customers not using tenants, the default pref set id on users isn't important. We default to just using it if you don't set a prefset id. So to me wrapping this into tenant prefs doc is the move as that's when you really need to know about pref id and the default set on user. 

Let me know if any of that feels off and ofc we should keep an ear out for customers after we ship this to see what we hear.

> ## Build your preference center

Reviewer: > We default to just using it if you don't set a prefset id.
I think my concern here is that we use `default` if you don't set an `id` only at the _SDK_ level, not the API level. This means that it's only true when someone uses the built-in `setPreferences` method, but for all the other ways you can set these (like when doing inline identification), you need to explicitly define `default` as the ID.

One reason I attempted to make that more explicit in my most-recent pass at Prefs docs is because a customer [ran into this ](https://knocklabs.slack.com/archives/C05NSTN5CRG/p1711746561222819) when starting their preferences implementation and it took me a bit to finally spot what was happening; if you don't nest things properly and include the `default` ID, you can still successfully "set" a preference but not what you think you set. In this case, they were providing a `workflow-key` but our system interpreted it as a `tenant.id` because of how it was nested.

> ## Build your preference center

Reviewer: I don't think there's actually an elegant way of "falling back" to the `default` preference set at the API level for this situation, because when doing inline identification it's possible that a customer might _intend_ to set a per-tenant preference that isn't the `default`.

> ## Build your preference center

Reviewer 2: I’m very late to this party, but my $0.02 is that we shouldn’t mention anything about inline preference setting in the overview, but we should shift it to a guide page like “Migrating preferences”. Generally, inline preferences are only really applicable in the situation where you need to migrate data into Knock because they are essentially always a destructive op. It’s also a very advanced topic IMO that necessitates speaking about pref set ids, as you mentioned Matt.

> ## Build your preference center

Author: Yep Chris I actually move the inline stuff to `/managing-recipients/identifying-recipients` as part of final pr we merged. 

@cellomatt your points on API-level need for `default` id make a lot of sense. Maybe we can call that out on the [API ref](https://docs.knock.app/reference#set-preferences-user) specifically? We already call it out to some extent but maybe there's more context that needs to be added. Could you take that as a next step?

> ## Build your preference center

Reviewer: Yep sure thing!

          preferences using our client library.
        </>
      }
    />

  </Step>
</Steps>

## Set a user's preferences

Once you've built your preferences center, you'll need to handle setting a user's preferences in your application.

<MultiLangCodeBlock
  title="Set preferences for a user"
  snippet="users.setPreferences"
/>

### Bulk set user preferences

You can update the preferences of up to 1000 users in a single batch by using the `users.bulkSetPreferences` method. This executes an asynchronous job which will overwrite any existing preferences for the users provided. You can track the progress of the `BulkOperation` returned via the [bulk operation API](/reference#bulk-operations).

<MultiLangCodeBlock
  title="Bulk set preferences for many users"
  snippet="users.bulkSetPreferences"
/>

<br />

<Callout
  mt={4}
  emoji="👩‍💻"
  text={
    <>
      <span className="font-bold">See an example.</span> Check out{" "}
      <a href="https://github.com/knocklabs/knock-node-example-app/blob/main/db/seeds.ts#L103">
        our example app
      </a>{" "}
      to see the bulk preferences API being used within the context of a
      collaboration app.
    </>
  }
/>

> ### Set preferences inline during a workflow trigger

Reviewer: Documenting anti-patterns is definitely helpful at times... maybe the question we should ask for scenarios like this is "would excluding this from the documentation lead to more questions or fewer questions", i.e. is it helpful to say "yes you can do this but here's why we wouldn't" as opposed to not saying anything and then fielding questions about "can we do this?"

I don't have an opinion either way for this example, but I do think there are some edge cases (like if you're migrating users but via inline identification, or if you've set up your application to make all recipient property updates inline) where someone _might_ want to do this, and those are things we do get questions on.

> ### Set preferences inline during a workflow trigger

Reviewer 3: > Documenting anti-patterns is definitely helpful at times
Yeah, I don't disagree with this statement, and I think you're right to look for some sort of question or framework to help frame these decisions that could ideally get codified in the style guide. 

From my POV, the 'more/fewer questions' framing doesn't feel quite right, but I like that we're having this discussion. Taking this specific example, it would be interesting to see what percentage of our users are implementing preferences this way, e.g. inline?  Is there a number where we'd feel safe enough cutting this material because it truly is an edge case that can be dealt with in a one-off manner, like less than 2%? 

I'm not trying to open a can of worms with any of this 😃 striking the right balance of just enough detail is challenging, so just trying to play devil's advocate here to make sure we're creating the best path for the majority.

> ### Set preferences inline during a workflow trigger

Reviewer: I agree that this is a great thing to discuss and develop a framework around! Maybe another way of framing my question would be whether or not including something creates more or less confusion (i.e. generates additional followup questions once you mention the non-recommended pathway). 

So basically, is calling this thing out actually making the concept clearer for the majority of customers, or is it potentially making it more convoluted (which it sounds like is perhaps what you're suggesting in this case)?

Would love if there were some way to put numbers/metrics to it as well, but that's probably going to be difficult in most cases

> ### Set preferences inline during a workflow trigger

Reviewer 3: Yeah, these are hard Qs to answer. I tend to lean towards task completion here, e.g. does adding this info make it more or less likely this user will create a preference center, or more broadly adopt Knock. Confusion, understanding, etc. are all pretty difficult to measure.

  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Resolving preference conflicts">
    Knock only sends a notification if all preference combinations that exist on the recipient evaluate to `true`.

    - A workflow can belong to multiple `categories`. Only one of those category preferences needs to evaluate to `false` for the notification not to send.
    - If a workflow's `category` is set to `false`, the notification will not send even if a `channel_type` on the workflow is explicitly set to `true`.

  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Debugging preferences">
    Our [Preferences API](/reference#preferences) provides endpoints for retrieving all of the preferences that have been set on a recipient.

    You can also use the [workflow debugger](/send-notifications/debugging-workflows) in your dashboard to view the preferences that were evaluated for the recipient on a given workflow run.

    <Image
      src="/images/concepts/preferences/workflow-preferences-evaluation.png"
      alt="An image of a workflow run's evaluated preferences"
      width={500}
      height={381}
      className="mx-auto rounded-md border border-gray-200"
    />

  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Advanced concepts

> - [Per-tenant preferences.](/preferences/per-tenant-preferences) In multi-tenant B2B applications, an advanced use case is customer admins that want to set the default preference set for new users within their tenant.

Reviewer: Alternatively:
```suggestion
- [Per-tenant preferences.](/preferences/per-tenant-preferences) In multi-tenant B2B applications, an advanced use case is customer admins who want to set tenant-level default preferences for new users within their tenant.
```

> - [Object preferences](/preferences/object-preferences). In the guide above, we referred to user preferences. You can also set preferences for objects.

Reviewer: I guess this answers my question about focusing on "users" above 😛

> - [Preference conditions](/preferences/preference-conditions). You can build advanced conditions and store them on Knock’s preference model to power use cases such as per-resource muting (example: mute notifications about this task) or threshold alerts (example: only notify me if account balance below $5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Preference conditions](/preferences/preference-conditions). You can build advanced conditions and store them on Knock’s preference model to power use cases such as per-resource muting (example: mute notifications about this task) or threshold alerts (example: only notify me if my account balance is below $5).
```

- 🛣️ [Send window preferences](/preferences/send-window-preferences). If you want to enable your users to configure when they should receive notifications from your application, you can programmatically set their send window preferences.

> - Workflow overrides. If you need to override a recipient's notification preferences to send notifications like a password reset email, you can override the preferences model. To do this, go to your workflow, click "Manage workflow", and enable "Override recipient preferences." You will need to commit this change for it to take effect. When enabled, the workflow will send to all of its channels, regardless of the recipient's preferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Workflow overrides. If you need to override a recipient's notification preferences to send notifications like a password reset email, you can override the preferences model. To do this, go to your workflow, click "Manage workflow," and enable "Override recipient preferences." You will need to commit this change for it to take effect. When enabled, the workflow will send to all of its channels, regardless of the recipient's preferences.
```
